# Intrusion Detection and Prevention System

***Definition***- IDPS works constantly monitoring your network and notifies network security personnel in case a Intrusion is detected by the system.

Intrusion is when someone tries to ==break in, misuse, or exploit== your system. More specifically speaking your ***organization's policy*** defines what constitutes to break in, misuse, or exploit the system. 

---

### Uses of IDPS

1) Prevent problematic behaviors by increasing the perceived risk of getting caught and punishment a.k.a Attack Deference 
2) Detect attacks and other violations
3) Detect and deal with <abbr title="Its not an fully fledged cybersecurity attack but rather a set of initial steps that attackers follow before attacking a system. e.g. Port Scanning">preambles to attacks</abbr>
4) Document a existing threat to an organization
5) Provide useful insights about a intrusion that takes place
6) **Data Collection** In the process of analyzing data and network activity, IDPS can be configured to log data for later analysis.

---

### Terminologies

****Alert or alarm**:** An alert or an alarm is a notification generated by the IDPS which is sent to the network security personnel in case IDPS detects a malicious or suspicious activity.
	It includes:
		-> Time Stamp of an event
		-> Source and Destination IP address
		-> Type of threat detected
		-> Severity of threat

****False Attack Stimulus**:** refers to harmless activity that was falsely identified as a threat. The IDPS thinks that the system is getting intruded but it is just a legitimate activity performed by an authorized user.

****False Negative**:** happens when a harmful activity that was flagged as safe by the IDPS. It can be caused due to several reasons like outdated IDPS, Poorly formed security policies by the organization or zero day exploits

****False Positive**:** happens when a non-harmful legitimate activity was flagged as harmful by the IDPS. This causes False Attack Stimulus to the system which can cause security personnel to get involved in investigating the activity wasting organization's resources for a threat that doesn't even exist.

**Noise:** refers to a set of events that are irrelevant, redundant or are just low-value alerts that are cluttering the logs of IDPS making it harder for security personnel to identify the real and more severe threats

**Site policy:** refers to a set of policies that are defined by the organization that constitutes what Intrusion means. Different sites may have different sets of security policy that defines that should and shouldn't be flagged as a `Intrusion`
	It includes:
		-> Security Expectations
		-> Authorized and Unauthorized Actions
		-> Access control list
		-> Monitoring and Response protocol

**True attack stimulus:** refers to harmful activity that was caused by a attacker to check how the system reacts in case if a Intrusion is detected. This allows attackers to create more sophisticated attack that can evade future detections by IDPS

**Confidence value**: is an probabilistic value which is assigned to each threat/intrusion that is detected. Low Confidence typically means that the threat detected has higher chance of being a false positive and Higher Confidence value means that it has higher chance of being a true positive.

---
### Types of IDPS

IDPS's can operate as network based IDPS or host-based IDPS

The goal of the Network based IDPS is focused on protecting network information assets by examining networking communication traffic. e.g. protecting info about routers, switches, firewalls, dns, dhcp servers, bandwidth and traffic of the system

Where else, the goal of the Host based IDPS is to focus on protecting server or host's information asset. e.g. protecting info about Web servers, database servers, operating systems and software's installed on host machine.


##### IDPS Fundamentals
- IDPS Sensors:
	- Collects and analyzes traffic
	- Can be software or hardware
	- Installed at different segments of the system
- IDPS Management:
	- Collection points for 
		- Alerts
		- Performs
		- Configuration
		- Deployment services
- Analysis Engine:
	- Brain of IDPS.
	- Processes collected data to determine whether intrusion has occurred
- Database server:
	- Stores all information from sensors for future ref.

#### Network Based IDPS (NIDPS)

A network based IDPS consists of a specialized software application and/or software designed to monitor network traffic. NIDPS includes separate management software called as a console and a number of software/hardware components called as <abbr title="A hardware and/or software component deployed on a remote computer or network
segment and designed to monitor network or system traffic for suspicious activities and report
back to the host application. For example, IDPS sensors report to an IDPS application.">agents or sensors</abbr>. These sensors can be deployed at different segments of a network allowing security personnel to remotely monitor the network at multiple locations for a potential intrusion.

**Wireless NIDPS:** 
- Works on Layer 2 and 3 of OSI Model.
- Cannot evaluate and diagnose issues in higher layer protocols ( Ex: TCP,UDP )
- Directly built in to the <abbr title="Router" >Access Point</abbr>.
- Can Also detect existing WLAN devices for Inventory Purposes.
	- Prevents MITM
	- Unauthorized WLAN Devices Truncation
	- Kicking Poorly Secured WLAN Device 

**Network Behaviour Analysis System ( NBA ):**
- Identifies problems related to flow of traffic
- Uses version anomaly detection 
- Uses Relevant Data
	- Source & Destination IP
- Most NBA Sensors can be deployed in passive mode only.
- Can Commonly detect
	- DOS Attacks
	- Scanning 
	- Worms
- Passive : Can Attempt to end a TCP session by sending TCP Reset Packets
- Inline : Typically made for network perimeter use.


#### Host Based IDPS ( HIDPS )
HIDPS or an HIDPS Sensor Resides on a particular computer or a server. AKA system integrity verifiers.
* Benchmarks and monitors key system files ( Integrity Verification )
	* Windows Registry
	* `.ini`, `.cfg`, `.dat`, etc.
* Advantages
	* Can access encrypted data
	* Has more data to examine 
	* It can literally sit behind any protocol endpoint
- Disadvantage
	- Optimization for multi host scanning
	- Susceptible to some DOS attacks
	- Can use large amount of disk space on a single host
	- Performance.
* Characteristics
	* Can work on only a single computer / server.
	* Examines All traffic through that sys
	* Stores its own data.

### IDPS Detection Methods

- Signature based detection:
	- 
- Anomaly based detection: 
- Stateful protocol analysis:
#### Signature Based Detection
- Method : Foot printing and fingerprinting analysis.
- Function : Exploits use a specific attack sequence to take advantage of vulnerability. 
- Disadvantages:
	- Cannot detect 0 day exploits
	- Same attacks in different patterns might go unnoticed.

#### Anomaly Based Detection
- Method : Collects Statistical summaries of traffic that is known to be ==**normal**== over time period known as Training Time.
- Function : Compares the sampled activity to the baseline.
- Advantages :
	- Can Detect 0 day exploits flags it as abnormal.
- Disadvantages : 
	- Resource Intensive.
	- Minor changes are often flagged False Positives.
	- Network Bandwidth usage is too high or low the anomaly based is not suited ( Underfitting Overfitting)
	- Easy to poison the system.

#### Stateful Protocol Analysis
- SPA Uses Opposite of signature based detection
- It compares the traffic to ==normal traffic==
- Advantages:
	- Better Against Specialised or multi session attacks
	- Closely Examines each packet in the application Layer.
	- Intentionally detects malformed commands
- Examines auth sessions.
- Disadvantages:
	- Heavy Processing Overhead.
	- Simultaneous Connection
	- Unless a protocol has enough data published it cannot provide a judgement with confidence
	- Unless a protocol's fundamental behaviour is violated it cannot detect intrusion.

